Expand Operation Concepts and Create Administration Concepts doc (#519)
minio/docs: source/operations/concepts.rst

   :local:
   :depth: 2

What is a MinIO Deployment?
---------------------------

A MinIO deployment consists of a set of storage and compute resources running one or more :mc:`minio server` nodes that together act as a single object storage repository. 

> What system topologies does MinIO support?

Author: Changed the initial heading to "What are the components of a MinIO Deployment?"
Added a new heading over the pool items as "How does a distributed MinIO deployment work?"

------------------------------------------

Topology refers to the way a system is designed, built, or architected.

MinIO can deploy to three types of topologies:

#. :ref:`Single Node Single Drive <minio-snsd>`, one MinIO server with a single drive or folder for data

   For example, testing on a local PC using a folder on the computer's hard drive. 
#. :ref:`Single Node Multi Drive <minio-snmd>`, one MinIO server with multiple mounted drives or folders for data

   For example, a single container with two or more mounted volumes.
#. :ref:`Multi Node Multi Drive <minio-mnmd>`, multiple MinIO servers with multiple mounted drives or volumes for data

   For example, a production deployment using Kubernetes to manage and deploy pods with multiple persistent volume claims. 

.. _minio-intro-server-pool:

> MinIO combines multiple drives and compute resources into one or more pools

Author: I was trying to reserve questions for the H2 headings and use statements or sentence fragments for the H3. But I'll switch.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The storage resource can be a single drive for testing purposes or one or more server pools.
A server pool a set of :mc:`minio server` nodes that pool their drives and resources to support object storage write and retrieval requests.

MinIO supports adding one or more server pools to existing MinIO deployments for horizontal expansion.
   
The :mc-cmd:`~minio server HOSTNAME` argument passed to the :mc:`minio server` command represents a Server Pool:

Consider the following example startup command, which creates a single Server Pool with 4 :mc:`minio server` nodes of 4 drives each for a total of 16 drives. 

.. code-block:: shell

   minio server https://minio{1...4}.example.net/mnt/disk{1...4}
                   
                |                    Server Pool                |

Starting server pools in the same :mc:`minio server` startup command enables awareness of all server pool peers.

See :mc:`minio server` for complete syntax and usage.

.. _minio-intro-cluster:

> Link one or more server pools into a single MinIO cluster

Author: 🤔

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A cluster refers to an entire MinIO deployment consisting of one or more Server Pools. 

Consider the command below that creates a cluster consisting of two Server Pools, each with 4 :mc:`minio server` nodes and 4 drives per node for a total of 32 drives. 

.. code-block:: shell

   minio server https://minio{1...4}.example.net/mnt/disk{1...4} \
                https://minio{5...8}.example.net/mnt/disk{1...4}
                   
                |                    Server Pool                |
   
Within a cluster, MinIO always stores each unique object and all versions of that object on the same Server Pool.

> A standalone cluster consists of a single Server Pool with a single :mc:`minio server` node. 

Author: Moved

Standalone clusters are best suited for initial development and evaluation. 
MinIO strongly recommends production clusters consist of a *minimum* of 4 :mc:`minio server` nodes in a Server Pool for proper high availability and durability guarantees.

> Adjust the number of pools available in a cluster

Author: Tweaked the phrasing, but updated to a question

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the time comes to retire or replace a server pool, :ref:`decommissioning <minio-decommissioning>` is the process of draining the objects of a pool to other active pools on the deployment.
MinIO rewrites objects from the decommissioned pool and does not allow additional writes to the pool while it is in decommissioning.
   
Once started, decommissioning cannot be stopped.

In a distributed MinIO deployment, you can upgrade the total available size of a :ref:`deployment <expand-minio-distributed>` or :ref:`cluster <minio-k8s-expand-minio-tenant>` by adding one or more additional server pools.
The addition of a server pool is an expansion.

> .. cond:: k8s

Author: I agree. Dropped the conditional.

   Deploy multiple MinIO clusters within a single management console
   ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   In Kubernetes, a tenant is a specific instance of MinIO with its own node(s), buckets, objects, volumes, access keys, and lifecycle management rules.
   The MinIO Operator can manage many MinIO tenants.

> How does MinIO provide availability, redundancy, and reliability?

Reviewer: I really like this section, but again think the headers need to be more SEO focused. Spitballing:

"MinIO uses Erasure Coding for Data Redundancy and Reliability"

"MinIO implements Bitrot Healing to Protect Data At Rest"

"MinIO distributes data across erasure sets for high availability and resiliency"

"MinIO automatically heals corrupt or missing data on-the-fly"

Author: I need to think more in terms of SEO. Going with these suggestions for now.

MinIO divides objects into chunks — called `shards` — and evenly distributes them among each drive in the Erasure Set. 
MinIO can continue seamlessly serving read and write requests despite the loss of any single drive. 
At the highest redundancy levels, MinIO can serve read requests with minimal performance impact despite the loss of up to half (:math:`N / 2`) of the total drives in the deployment.

MinIO calculates the size and number of Erasure Sets in a Server Pool based on the total number of drives in the set *and* the number of :mc:`minio` servers in the set. See :ref:`minio-ec-erasure-set` for more information.

Correct errors automatically with healing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Healing is MinIO's ability to restore data after some event causes data loss.
Data loss can come from bit rot, drive loss, or node loss.

:ref:`Erasure coding <minio-erasure-coding>` provides continued read and write access if an object has been partially lost.

Depending on configurations, MinIO can tolerate losing up to half of the available drives on a deployment without losing data.

> Write data protection at the object level with parity

Reviewer: I'd just merge this up into the Erasure Coding section, and simplify as much as possible while pointing to the EC docs.

   :local:
   :depth: 2

What are the components of a MinIO Deployment?
----------------------------------------------

A MinIO deployment consists of a set of storage and compute resources running one or more :mc:`minio server` nodes that together act as a single object storage repository. 

> A standalone cluster consists of a single Server Pool with a single :mc:`minio server` node. 

Reviewer: Can a SNSD deployment be a cluster? I'm a little lost on how we want to use this term.

Author: Good catch. Our style guide calls for us to avoid using `cluster` for SNSD, only for distributed deployments. Swapped for instances in this paragraph.

Standalone clusters are best suited for initial development and evaluation. 

> A MinIO deloyment can run directly on a physical device in a ``baremetal`` scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A MinIO deloyment can run directly on a physical device in a ``baremetal`` or non-virtualized infrastructure.
```

Author: 👍

#. :ref:`Single Node Multi Drive <minio-snmd>`, one MinIO server with multiple mounted drives or folders for data

   For example, a single container with two or more mounted volumes.
#. :ref:`Multi Node Multi Drive <minio-mnmd>`, multiple MinIO servers with multiple mounted drives or volumes for data

   For example, a production deployment using Kubernetes to manage and deploy pods with multiple persistent volume claims. 

How does a distributed MinIO deployment work?
---------------------------------------------

A distributed deployment makes use of the resources of more than one physical or virtual machine's compute and storage resources.
In modern situations, this often means running MinIO in a private or public cloud environment, such as with Amazon Web Services, the Google Cloud Platform, Microsoft's Azure platform, or many others.

.. _minio-intro-server-pool:

How does MinIO manage multiple virtual or physical servers?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While testing MinIO may only involve a single drive on a single computer, most production MinIO deployments use multiple compute and storage devices to create a high availability environment.

> A server pool a set of :mc:`minio server` nodes that pool their drives and resources to support object storage write and retrieval requests.

Reviewer: This is a good place to have a diagram, at some point.

Author: @oscarocastellanos Any suggestions of images we could use?

> MinIO supports adding one or more server pools to existing MinIO deployments for horizontal expansion.

Reviewer: One key thing is each server pool is effectively a fault domain. 

If I hvae 3 server pools and one goes offline, objects stored in the other two remain accessible.

Author: As long as people don't take that to mean that all objects remain available, since objects are written to erasure sets within a specific pool.

Author: Added a line about objects going to the same server pool.

Likewise, you can add on a new server pool to an existing deployment to expand the total size of a deployment with a horizontal expansion.

When the time comes to retire or replace a server pool, :ref:`decommissioning <minio-decommissioning>` is the process of draining the objects of a pool to other active pools on the deployment.
MinIO rewrites objects from the decommissioned pool and does not allow additional writes to the pool while it is in decommissioning.
   
Once started, decommissioning cannot be stopped.

In a distributed MinIO deployment, you can upgrade the total available size of a :ref:`deployment <expand-minio-distributed>` or :ref:`cluster <minio-k8s-expand-minio-tenant>` by adding one or more additional server pools.
The addition of a server pool is an expansion.

Does MinIO provide a tool to manage multiple MinIO clusters within a single interface?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In Kubernetes, a tenant is a specific instance of MinIO with its own node(s), buckets, objects, volumes, access keys, and lifecycle management rules.

> The MinIO Operator can manage many MinIO tenants.

Reviewer: I think we need to revisit this - Kubernetes is not a tool we provide. And `mc` can technically speak to multiple MinIO clusters.

Probably :+1: 

"How do I manage a MinIO cluster?"

- using mc
- using console
- for Kubernetes, using MinIO Operator Console.

Author: Good point. Updated to a linked list as suggested.

The following core concepts are fundamental to operation of MinIO deployments, including but not limited to installation and management of MinIO.

Deployment Architecture
-----------------------

Topology
   Topology refers to the way a system is designed, built, or architected.

   MinIO can deploy to three types of topologies:

>    #. :ref:`Single Node Single Drive <minio-snsd>`, one MinIO server with a single drive or folder for data

Author: I'm iffy on ending punctuation for a list item that isn't a sentence.

      For example, testing on a local PC using a folder on the computer's hard drive. 
   #. :ref:`Single Node Multi Drive <minio-snmd>`, one MinIO server with multiple mounted drives or folders for data
      For example, a single container with two or more mounted volumes.

>    #. :ref:`Multi Node Multi Drive <minio-mnmd>`, multiple MinIO servers with multiple mounted drives or volumes for data

Author: Like above, this is a list item that is not a sentence.

      For example, a production deployment using Kubernetes to manage and deploy pods with multiple persistent volume claims. 

.. _minio-intro-server-pool:

:ref:`Server Pool <minio-intro-server-pool>`
   A set of MinIO :mc:`minio server` nodes which pool their drives and resources for supporting object storage/retrieval requests. 

>    Server pools support horizontal expansion for MinIO deployments.

Author: Rewritten to avoid passive, but otherwise added.

                   
                   |                    Server Pool                |
   
   The above example describes two Server Pools, each consisting of 4 :mc:`minio server` nodes with 4 drives each for a total of 32 drives. 
   MinIO always stores each unique object and all versions of that object on the same Server Pool.

   Server Pool expansion is a function of Horizontal Scaling, where each new set expands the cluster storage and compute resources. 

>    Server Pool expansion is not intended to support migrating existing sets to newer hardware. 

Author: Agreed. I discuss expansion elsewhere anyway. Cut.

   MinIO Standalone clusters consist of a single Server Pool with a single :mc:`minio server` node. 

>    Standalone clusters are best suited for initial development and evaluation. MinIO strongly recommends production clusters consist of a *minimum* of 4 :mc:`minio server` nodes in a Server Pool.

Author: 👍

.. cond:: k8s

   Tenant

>       In a distributed MinIO deployment, a tenant is a specific instance of a MinIO with its own set of buckets, objects, volumes, access keys, and lifecycle management rules.

Author: 👍

      A distributed MinIO deployment's MinIO Operator can manage many MinIO tenants.

   Decommission
      When the time comes to retire or replace a server pool on a distributed MinIO deployment, decommissioning is the process of draining the objects of a pool to other active pools on the deployment.
      MinIO rewrites objects from the decommissioned pool and does not allow additional writes to the pool while it is in decommissioning.
      Once started, decommissioning cannot be stopped.

   Expansion
      In a distributed MinIO deployment, the total available size of deployment can increase by adding one or more additional server pools.
      The addition of a server pool is an expansion.

Data Protection
---------------

Bitrot
   Random, silent corruption to data that can happen on any storage device.

>    Bit rot corruption is not prompted by any activity from a user, nor does the system notify about a change to the data.

Author: 👍

   MinIO uses a hashing algorithm to confirm the integrity of an object.
   If an object becomes corrupted by bit rot, MinIO can automatically heals the object depending on the system topology and availability.

:ref:`Erasure Coding <minio-erasure-coding>`
   MinIO Erasure Coding is a data redundancy and availability feature that allows MinIO deployments to automatically reconstruct objects on-the-fly despite the loss of multiple drives or nodes in the cluster. 

>    Erasure Coding provides object-level healing with less overhead than adjacent technologies such as RAID or replication.

Author: 👍

:ref:`Erasure Set <minio-ec-erasure-set>`
   A set of disks that supports MinIO :ref:`Erasure Coding <minio-erasure-coding>`. 
   Erasure Coding provides high availability, reliability, and redundancy of data stored on a MinIO deployment.

   MinIO divides objects into chunks and evenly distributes them among each drive in the Erasure Set. 

>    MinIO can continue seamlessly serving read and write requests despite the loss of any single drive. 

Author: Added in the sentence on line 102.

   At the highest redundancy levels, MinIO can serve read requests with minimal performance impact despite the loss of up to half (:math:`N / 2`) of the total drives in the deployment.

Healing
   Healing is MinIO's ability to restore data after some event causes data loss.
   Data loss can come from bitrot, drive loss, or node loss.

   Depending on configurations, MinIO can tolerate losing up to half of the available drives on a deployment without losing data.

Parity
   A MinIO deployment with multiple drives divides the available drives into data drives and parity drives.

>    MinIO Erasure Coding adds additional hasing information about the contents of an object to the parity drives when writing an object.

Author: 😂 Now that's funny.
But fixed anyway. Thanks for the catch!

>    MinIO uses the parity information to confirm the integrity of an object and, if necessary, to restore a lost, missing, or corrupted object.

Author: 👍

   MinIO can tolerate losing up to the total number of parity devices available in the erasure set while still providing full access to an object.

Quorum 
   A minimum number of drives or volumes that must be available to perform a task.
   MinIO has one quorum for reading data and a separate quorum for writing data.

>    Typically, MinIO requires a higher number of available volumes to maintain the ability to write objects than to read objects.

Author: 👍
